Once around, Canopus.
Canopus is the second brightest star in
all of the sky, second only to Sirius.
It's the brightest star in the
constellation of Karina in the southern
hemisphere and therefore gets the
designation Alpha Karini.
Magnitude minus0.74.
[Music]
So very bright indeed. Sirius manages to
beat it at minus 1.4.
Um, but uh this is one of the very few
stars that has a negative visual
magnitude.
Now at declination minus 52°
in the sky. It's well into the southern
part of the sky. Not visible from the UK
where I'm based, but I have seen it.
I've traveled around to various places
in the world, South Africa, uh the
Caribbean and so forth. And then from
there it's very very prominent indeed
and you can often see it riding very
high up in the sky.
Originally it was the brightest star in
the constellation of Argo Navvice and
Argo Navvice represented the ship Argo
used by Jason and the Argonauts and was
a truly vast constellation covering a
huge area of the sky. I think there's
something like 1,600 visible stars in
it. Um, the name comes from the pilot of
Menaus's
ship when he went on his quest to try
and retrieve Helen of Troy. Uh, so
that's where the name Canapus comes
from. And
nowadays, Argo Navvice is no more. It's
been split up into three separate
constellations.
Pupis, Veiler, and Karina. And Canopus
ends up just in that corner of Karina.
You can see the three of them. And
indeed, you could figure out how they
all fit together um and were fitted
together in Argo Navvice in the first
place.
Now, before the Hippacos satellite was
sent up and used the parallax method to
try to pin down the
uh distances to a whole range of stars
in the relatively near part of the
universe out to about 500 light years.
Estimates of the distance to Canopus
varied wildly. They went from 96 all the
way to 1,200 light years. And of course,
estimates of its size, mass, power, etc.
varied with those because the standard
candle rule tells us that at a greater
distance from us to be seen as the same
brightness, it would have to be a more
powerful star.
It's too bright for the cameras on GIA
to be able to lock onto it properly and
give us parallax from that. So, we're
still dependent on the value of 310
light years from Hippocos.
And what we know about it is that it's
orbiting around the galaxy in a very
nearly circular path doing about 24.5
kilometers/s.
And slowly that's taking it away from
the sun at about 20 km/s.
The paths of the two stars are diverging
slightly. And if you run the clock
backwards about 3 million years, it
would have been much closer. At its
closest approach, it would have been 172
light years away. So it's nearly doubled
that distance in the last 3 million
years and is beginning to get away from
us.
But in the past, it has also been the
brightest star in the night sky. It's
such a powerhouse of a star and one of
the most powerful stars in the nearby
part of uh the galaxy that about 90,000
years ago, it lost its first place to
Sirius as Sirius came closer. And
Sirius, of course, is now only just over
eight light years away. So, a lot
nearer. Even though it's less powerful,
it seems brighter to us. But give it
210,000 more years and Sirius will have
moved past us and away, and Canopus will
take over again as being the brightest
star in the night sky. I wouldn't
suggest you try and wait for that.
Physically,
it's a bright giant. It's an interesting
class of stars. When you first study
astronomy, they tell you about ordinary
stars, main sequence stars, and then
they talk about red giants and white
dwarfs and red dwarfs and so on. Um, but
the more you dig into it, the more you
find the classification system has quite
a lot of caveats and subclasses.
And so, this one is a bright giant. and
the spectral lines within the atmosphere
of it originally classified it at the
hot end of the F-class F0, but there's
some evidence that really it should be
the cold end of the next class up the A9
category. And so officially it's now an
A9 having been promoted from F-0.
um F-0 they estimated the temperature of
just under 7,000 but now the modern
figure is 7,400
and this makes it appear white with a
color index very close to zero at plus
0.15. Now, some people have described it
as yellow um usually from the northern
hemisphere observations because the star
is very low in the sky and just in the
same way that the sky is blue,
the light coming in from stars at night,
some of the blue light is scattered and
white minus blue is yellow. And so the
lower the star is in the sky, the more
the atmosphere tends to yellow it. And
so we have to watch out for that a
little bit.
It's bigger than the sun, nine times the
solar mass or thereabouts, maybe as much
as 10, maybe as low as eight, depends
which estimate you look at. And from
interpherometer measurements where
telescopes have been combined to try and
estimate the radius of it, we know it's
71 times the sun's radius. And that high
temperature, considerably hotter than
the sun, and the larger disc means that
the light output is 10,000 times as much
as our sun. So a white star, very
powerful indeed. And of course that's
why we see it as so bright at 310 light
years away.
Now inside it going on right in the core
it has ignited the helium fusion
process. So it's fusing helium into
carbon and then carbon plus helium goes
on to make oxygen building up a carbon
oxygen core which is beginning to build
in the center. There's still plenty of
helium left in it at the moment in that
core region. And then outside of the
core, the residual hydrogen is igniting
to burn to make more helium, which is of
course then falling into the core as
well. Uh helium is denser than hydrogen
at the same temperature. And so gravity
tends to pull the heavy elements down
into the central region. So we're
beginning to form a carbon oxygen core.
got a lot of helium still fusing away
and the star is being pretty efficient
at the moment using most of its mass to
liberate energy
and for that reason it is on what we
call a blue loop. So the life cycle of
cannabis started around 30 million years
or so ago and it continued burning away
turning hydrogen to helium as a blue
white main sequence star around about 10
solar masses
gradually losing mass. All stars tend to
give off stellar winds which reduce
their mass over time. So it's gone down
a little bit since it first uh ignited.
But after that 30 million years of main
sequence burning, it ran out of hydrogen
in the core. And when that happens, the
star has to reorganize.
The force of gravity remains, but the
energy liberation reduces. The star
becomes less efficient as an inert ball
of helium builds in the center. And so
what happens is that the core of the
star shrinks and increases in
temperature and the outer layers of the
star get forced outwards and expand into
a red giant. So it traverses the uh path
from the main sequence around that
little bit that's called a hook. We'll
have to come back and talk about the
hook another time. becomes a subgiant as
it's transitioning and then a full red
giant
and gradually progresses up the red
giant line up to the tip of the red
giant branch as is shown there.
And when it's at the tip of the red
giant branch, it can, if the mass is
correct,
undergo a helium ignition. the core
temperature and pressure gets to 100
um million degrees Kelvin and that's
enough to ignite the helium triggering
that helium to carbon fusion. Suddenly
there's a lot more energy being released
again and the star reorganizes and
changes um increases its output and goes
on the trajectory of the blue loop there
that its outer layers increasing in
temperature to uh the sort of 7 or 8,000
degrees. And that's what we think
Canopus has done.
After that it will cross back across the
instability strip because gradually the
carbon oxygen will build up in the core
and that will be inert to begin with and
it will lose efficiency and again fades
from being a furious blue white color on
the surface. the temperature drops and
it becomes red again on the AGB
asotic giant branch which is a kind of
super red giant where you have an inert
carbon oxygen core and around that a
helium shell and then a hydrogen shell
over the top of that.
And we're not sure whether Canopus is
heading across the lower branch of the
blue loop from being a red giant out
towards the blue or whether it's already
turned and is heading back across that
so-called instability strip on its
journey back to being an AGB star. It's
uh got a temperature of 7,400. So it's
not at the tip of the blue loop. It's on
either the upper or lower track and
we're not quite sure which. Now in
future it's going to burn as an AGB star
for a while and then eventually the
carbon and other elements will ignite in
the center and it'll take further small
short blue loops and go through the
phases building heavier and helier
elements up to possibly building a iron
core at which point it will h suffer the
core collapse and explode as a type two
supernovi.
Now, some references that you read will
tell you that that happens for stars
that have eight solar masses. Um, and
others tell you anything up to 10.5
solar masses is required. um as the
minimum for a type two core collapse
supernova and that gap the 8 to uh 10.5
is significant because if it's below
eight we think it will fail to detonate
and die as a planetary nebula and leave
a white dwarf probably the carbon oxygen
core
in the range 8 to 10 and a half it will
probably go on a bit further and make
some neon and some magnesium and some
other elements and may well form a
slightly uh different white dwarf, an
oxygen neon magnesium white dwarf or
even some other very rare kinds but
still just stop short of making uh a
collapsing iron core. And so I think the
the real limit is around 10.5.
Now we estimate and the most accurate
estimate of the mass for canopers is 9.8
but there's quite a variation on either
side of that. So it might or might not
form one of these advanced white dwarfs
or it might detonate and produce a
neutron star.
Now at the moment, very typical of these
blue loop stars, it is producing quite a
significant amount of soft X-rays coming
from the corona, the outer envelope, the
outer atmosphere of the star, which is
heated by the magnetic field and by the
rapid rotations and convections going on
as all that enormous amount of heat is
rising out of the star. And that this uh
creates a very rapidly changing magnetic
field. And as with the sun, in fact, the
corona ends up at millions of degrees.
And anything that ends up that hot is
going to give off some X-rays.
In terms of companions, there is one
possibility,
cannabis B, and this was identified in
2014. There was a paper published saying
that a red dwarf star was noted to be
just 1.16 degrees of sky away south from
Canopus and it seemed to be moving
across the sky with the same proper
motion and that is a clue that they are
um moving together.
And so cannabis B was identified in the
two mass survey and has that ridiculous
catalog number JO6234738-5351131.
I'm not going to try and say that again.
And it's about six light years away from
Canopus A, the primary main star. And
that's a long way. The distance from
Earth to Alpha Centuri is only four
light years and Barnard's star is six
light years away and those are quite
independent.
But Canopus is a much more massive star
and so its sphere of influence of its
gravity is considerably larger and it
could well extend out to over six light
years. There are no other stars that we
know of have of any significant mass in
the region and so it's likely that
Canopus is the controlling object here
and that uh Canopus B is in orbit around
it. U but I'm not sure that we are
definitive about that.
Now, the name Canopus turns up all over
the place, and there are far too many
instances of interesting cultural links
for me to talk about them all. We have
the battleship Canopus, a uh pre-
dreadnaugh
battleship of the uh early 1900s. There
at the top left, there's old class of
Canapus type battleships produced.
Top right we have Avarios who argued
using cannabis that the earth was round.
He wasn't the first person to do such a
thing obviously but he noted that you
could see cannabis if you were south in
Marrakesh but if you came over the water
to Spain then it was below the horizon.
and he uh was very prominent in pointing
this out as definitive evidence that the
earth must be round.
Uh the picture at the bottom left that's
a Russian satellite called Canopus B
which orbits the Earth taking lots of
photographs and on the right we have the
Brazilian flag which shows Canopus very
prominently as one of the many stars
that are illustrated in that central
blue circle of the flag there.
And I haven't mentioned planets because
although we don't know of any real
planets, I've saved this till the end
because Canopus is supposed to be the
home of the planet Arachus in the Dune
series. Arachus is supposed to be the
third planet of the Canopus system. And
so it's just seems to turn up all over
different uh sci-fi, but perhaps most
famously in this case here. Um so I
think that's a good place to end and
thank you very much for listening. That
was once around Canopus.